Instead of telling me, Karla, you should do this,
you shouldn't do this, this is right or this is wrong,
my dad prefers to tell me stories.

His stories are what have shaped the decisions I make in life
much more than he can imagine.

I'll give you an example: when I was 10 years old my dad lived
one of the most chilling situations that anyone can imagine.

Returning from a family dinner in Cuernavaca he finds
one of the nannies floating face down in the pool.

My dad immediately jumps into the water,
pulls the young girl out of the pool and tries desperately
to do everything possible to revive her without any success.

I didn't find out until years later what happened
but my dad tells me that that night lying in bed unable to sleep
all he can see is the image of the poor girl floating in the pool.

So he decides to get out of bed, return to the pool
sit down in a chair staring fixedly at the pool,
facing the trauma head on.

Uncomfortable.

The images resurfacing, the body, her wet hair,
her family, death, guilt, the what ifs running through his mind.

Why did we go out to dinner?
Why did she go swimming alone if she didn't know how to swim?
How? Why? What if.

He continues to confront, sitting in that chair,
not wanting to get up until he can overcome those thoughts.

Seven hours pass, the sun is just beginning to rise
and my dad tries to remember other moments
happy moments that we also had in that pool.

Vacations, games, laughter; and little by little, that image or that trauma
started to lose power over my dad.

In moments where I most want to run away,
flee, evade,
I remember this story.

His stories invite me to dare to be uncomfortable.

To what scares me the most.
And today is such a case.

When I was invited to give a TED Talk
my first reaction was "not on your life".

No, no, invite me to act any character,
to portray a drunk, to sing off-key
a pedant, a disturbed, perverse criminal.

A law student killer, whatever you want and I'll happily do it.

Even ask me to play the actress
and pose in front of the cameras in Hollywood
people from everywhere, Hollywood stars
with uncomfortable heels, too much makeup, smile,
and answer those indiscreet questions
they love to ask.

Ask me to do that and I'll happily do it
but asking me to be myself
remove the masks
of the characters I hide behind
come to this stage
and expose myself honestly and sincerely with you.

the result is stomach cramps, insomnia and a strong desire
to say: "No, sorry, it's just that my schedule won't allow it.

So I hope my dad is proud that I'm here with you.

His stories are my inheritance.
And they are what move me in the least comfortable direction.

We live in a society where we try to avoid those uncomfortable moments.
Those difficult moments at all costs.
A society that sells us ideas.
Ideas that in my opinion are very well made up lies.

From the simple ones like:
"Lose 15 kilos in 2 days without exercise or diet".
"Learn a whole language in just two weeks".

Or the subtle filters that we put on the photos that
we upload to social networks that are perfect and unreal versions
of who we are and drown us
when we try to maintain that image or that standard.

Or what about the lives of Rafa Márquez,
Rodolfo Neri, Inárritu or Frida Kahlo that
paint them as gifted beings
who only reached success because of their talent
and not because of hours and hours of experience,
daily work and failure.

The worst thing is that we believe in these lies.

You don't know how many times people come to me and say:
"Karla, how do I achieve my dreams in life?"

I want to be an actress,
my mom and my aunt tell me I'm really good.

And when I ask them: Well, what classes or courses are you taking?

No well, it's just that I haven't yet but well,
it's just that my mom and my aunt tell me that
I'm ready to start acting.

Lie.

I have a video from when I was 12 years old
acting for a school project
so you can see that
my desire to be an actress
was not enough to do it.

Do you see how important it was to study for hours and hours?
I still take acting classes.

My author, well, one of my favorite authors,
Malcolm Gladwell proves this theory in his book "Outliers"
He takes cases of successes and geniuses
that we normally think were born that way, gifted
and calculates that they actually had more than 10,000 hours
of experience and study in their field
before being titled geniuses or experts.

I practiced Olympic gymnastics for 8 years
training 5 hours a day from Monday to Saturday,
with sores on my hands leaving blood on the bars
I had to keep pushing myself, knowing that I had to do it
to continue being part of the team.

Getting up at 5 in the morning
to train before school
sacrificing trips,
parties, boyfriends.

Those 8 years taught me that the gold medal is not won accidentally
the muscle has to tear to grow.
The muscle has to tear
to be able to grow.

Although I understand the science behind this
then why do I still curse
the moments when adversity knocks on my door.

Imagine this, I'm on the first day
at acting school in London;

5000 kids audition
and they only accept 15 women and 15 men.

So, as you can imagine,
I feel a little too special.

On that first day, one of the most respected professors told us:

"In 5 years, only 3 out of the 30 here will have jobs in this career".

That's about 10%, but if we're all talented,
I don't think it will be that hard.

And as the months went by,
6 dropped out in the first year,
some changed their profession, their career,
we lost some to emotional and mental crises,
and even a friend of mine, Robin.

One of the most talented actors
from that school committed suicide.

It's hard.

Whatever career you want to do
is and will be difficult.

So, what's your fuel?
What will make you endure in the darkest,
hardest moments you will encounter?

What is, as a lawyer would say in the series
"How To Get Away With Murder", your motive?
I don't judge,
if your motive is to be rich, to be famous,
to make your ex regret breaking up with you,
that's okay.

The only thing I say is that this motive must be so ingrained in your being,
so imbued in your skin,
that no matter the storm, the rejection,
the criticism you receive, this motive will make you get up
and keep going.

"Karla, sorry, we're looking for someone more famous for this role".
Get up, Karla, keep going. "

"Karla, we're looking for someone less famous for this role."
"More Latina, less Latina, thinner, less thin."
"Go on Karla, keep going, keep going."

The amount of no's, rejections, and criticisms I receive
every day range from comments from producers like those
to comments on Twitter like:

"No, well, I didn't like your performance."
Or "you're pretty but you're very cross-eyed."
"Chicken legs."

Or comments from family and friends
Why are you going to Hollywood, Karla?
You're crazy, get real.
You'll never make it.
Hmm, where was I?

Ah, yes!
One day...
I get notice of a casting for a film called "The Jesuit"
written by the same guy who wrote
"Taxi Driver", "Raging Bull";
Paul Schrader.

They're looking for an actress my age.
So I call the casting lady
"Karla, I'm sorry,
the thing is that the producers
are looking for someone who can...
The producers don't believe you can play this role."

Well, I knew one of the producers
so I call him: "Karla, look, we're looking
for someone who can play a rough and racist Texan."
Perfect! I, I can give you that.
"Of course, Karlita...
Look, what happens is that the director thinks you're very pretty,
very delicate...
We're looking for someone who looks like a drug addict."

He hangs up on me.
Well, I'm angry and frustrated because I just wanted the opportunity to audition
but they don't even want to give me that,
so I get the script.
I learn a scene.
I ask my makeup artist and hairdresser friends to help me
look less "delicate".

I rent a camera, some lights
and the next day I send this to the producer.

Two weeks went by and I didn't receive a reply to the email.
Suddenly I get a call and it's the producer with the director:
"Karla, we offer you the role."
So we filmed the movie, but guess what?

The movie hasn't come out and I don't even know if it will.
Hopefully it will, but sometimes it feels like the effort was for nothing.
But no one can take that experience away from me
and besides I added to my 10,000 hours.

Success is the ability to go from failure to failure
with enthusiasm, as Churchill wisely said.

And I believe a good motive can help you do that.
However, my motive has not always been the same, it changed.

8 years ago.
Drastically.

I was at the end of my first year of the 3-year
acting career in London
and one day for no reason at all I lose my speech.

For 3 months.
I can't speak, for 3 months I can't utter
a miserable statement.

Neither the doctors nor the electroencephalograms
have been able to explain to me what really happened.

What i can tell you is that there came a moment of such frustration
and despair that i wanted to take my own life.

In this moment I look withing myself for the strength that i thought I had,
I look for the help of my family, of my friends,
my faith in God and I find nothing.

"There is no cure, there is no way out.

My reason, my fuel quickly begins to fade and runs out.

The hell in which I find myself, however,
becomes a little less heavy when I begin to see my pain.
The same kind of pain reflected
in the works of art of other people.
The plays in the movies,
in the paintings.

Little by little, I begin to see my pain
and I begin to read it in the poems,
the words of the poets
and the characters begin to fill my silences.

They begin to be the only way in
which I felt that my emotions begin to be expressed.

I read my pain in the poems of Sylvia Plath:
"I bow to you numbed like a fossil, tell me I'm here".

I connect with the constant questioning
of life in Jack Kerouac's books;

I see Frida Kahlo's paintings
and for the first time I can touch that suffering
and that loneliness of her self-portraits.

Art becomes something alive.

During those 3 months of silence,
of pressure and anguish,
I fell inexplicably, completely
and totally in love with art.

The suffering came to me like a nail in the heart of God.

And it saddens me to know that there are people who do not believe
that art is worthy of our attention
and our funding.

Because for me it is not just a passion,
it is what saved my life, what kept me alive.

Another test came 3 years ago when I won the lottery;
I fell in love with a man.
Let's call him Pedro to preserve his anonymity.
I wanted to marry Pedro.
That is, I was very much in love.

I discovered that Pedro's family here in Mexico is very powerful,
they had a lot of money,
much more than I imagined existed,
much more than I could spend in a lifetime.

One day they sit me down, they tell me:
"Karla we adore you,
we want you to be part of our family
we only have one condition: leave acting.

We support you in whatever you want in any other profession you choose
but leave acting, because if you continue acting
you will not be able to be a faithful wife, you will not be able to be a good mother
and we want the best for you.

My eyes were burning.
I get up
and say goodbye to Pedro and his family.
I turn around and leave without knowing what I was going to do with my life
but knowing that the call that God has in my life
my dreams and my passion have no price.

And my husband, who is here, loves that story.

Why do I tell you these stories?

Because people usually believe that success and fame
are something wonderful and easy to navigate.

These tests for me generate fruits such as forgiveness,
perseverance, discipline, character and hope.

They are what sharpen my craft and what, with a lot of, a lot of patience,
are fine-tuning my being and freeing me from my pride.

I have learned that applause lasts only a moment
and that fame that we seek so obsessively
is a mere bubble that so easily pops.

I don't have the secret formula for how
to achieve your dreams and goals in life."

I continue learning as I progress
with the help of my dad's stories
I continue daring to face my fears
I keep adding to my 10,000 hours
to achieve excellence in my craft
and I continue daring to use the sufferings
so that they continue to come to me like a nail in the heart of God.

Some ideas and personal discoveries that we have in life
in some way cannot be shared,
they cannot be explained.

They can only be revealed, they can only be lived.
However I hope that the words of my compadre
William Shakespeare can resonate with you along your path:

"Sweet are the fruits of adversity,
which like an ugly and poisonous toad carries on its head a precious jewel".

Adversity
often looks like
that toad,
ugly and poisonous
but every time it comes,
every time the challenge arises now that I think about it
on the path that i take,
I find a precious jewel.
Thank you.
(Applause)