I guess many of you play or used to play video games.
And if your parents are a bit like mine,
all you heard was that you were wasting your time.
My name is Humberto Cervera. I'm 20 years old.
I've been a gamer for.. I've been a gamer for 17 years.
And today I want to prove to our parents that we were not wasting time.
These are.. (laughs and applause)
These are the 10 things I learned from video games.
And the first, and one of the most important, is that we need to find a purpose.
From the moment you insert the game into the console, the purpose is clear: save the princess, protect the castle, rescue the galaxy.
The purpose defines the game.
You need a purpose in your life that defines it.
It doesn't matter if it's something as simple as starting a business,
or something as complicated as saving the world.
With enough effort, anything is possible.
Do you want to be Batman?
Well, let me introduce you to a study by Dr. Paul Sehr:
"Becoming Batman."
It's 100% scientific.
It takes 21 years to become Batman.
It takes a lot of effort.
It's difficult yes, impossible no.
And like any other purpose, it's not something that can be accomplished overnight.
Games teach you that to reach that moment of epic win,
to achieve that goal that you've been longing for,
you have to do 100 small tasks that will lead you to it.
And the moment you achieve that goal,
it becomes the set of experiences you lived through to get there.
So, in a game like Minecraft,
where each block you see there has to be moved one by one.
Something that starts like this ends up being an exact replica of Minas Tirith.
Something like this, can't be achieved without thinking long term.
Because, as the saying goes,
"The Death Star wasn't built in a day." (laughs)
But well, an essential part of thinking long term is knowing how to manage ourselves.
Do you want that new rifle in Call of Duty...
but keep spending all your money on 100 different camouflages for your only weapon?
Well, stop spending so much, save a little, and buy the rifle.
It's not quantum physics.
Anyway, in the same way, if you have all these games...
and you can't afford the latest novelty...
well, sell 5 of these games and buy the newest one.
In life as in games, you can't have it all.
Do you want the power to break walls with a single punch?
Well, the point you spend on that you will never use to be faster.
It's about optimizing resources.
Basically, you can't be a hoarder.
If you pick up all the guns,
you run out of space for bullets in your backpack, and vice versa.
But on the other hand, if you know your objective and have it clear,
you grab the weapon you need, the type of bullet you need,
and you even have space left in your backpack for what you find along the way.
I invite you to, once a year in your life, take out of your closet everything you don't use anymore,
go sell it at a used buy and open up space for new experiences in your life.
Dare to take a risk.
All games start with the main character..
daring to do something that no one had dared to do before.
Can you imagine if when Mario Bros gets to the mushroom..
and it says: "Mario, the princess has been kidnapped!"
Mario replies:
"Gosh, I'm going to have to get another girlfriend."?
(laughs)
No, no, no!
Mario gets up and says:
"I'm going to take the risk of facing Bowser.
I'm going to go to that castle and rescue her."
Because Mario understands that to have something you've never had,
you have to try something you've never done.
And Mario knows he's not going to succeed at first!
I mean, since 1985, he's been facing this sign.
(laughs)
But Mario doesn't give up, Mario persists!
A game will never give you a challenge you can't handle.
But it won't give you a challenge that's impossible either.
If it's too easy, you get bored. If it's hard, you get frustrated.
But every time you lose in the game,
you have to ask yourself:
What did I do wrong? How can I overcome? What can I do to be better?
And that's what motivates you, knowing that what you want can be achieved.
In games, you have to ask yourself all the possible questions.
Yes!
In Mass Effect 2, the Whirples are going to attack the galaxy.
But that's not the whole story.
Where do they come from? Why do they want to destroy us now?
That's essential information to defeat them.
And in your profession, you have to ask all the possible questions.
And the day you come across a question without an answer,
that's the question worth answering.
Because with enough effort, you will find the answer.
And you will leave your mark in that field of knowledge.
You don't know where the answer will be!
And that's why you have to be willing to explore your surroundings.
Yes, in the game you might have to turn right there...
but you didn't, and you found a treasure and a map.
In life, maybe it was time to turn around but you kept walking...
and you found the inspiration for the answer that had been evading you.
Einstein came up with the basis of relativity while sitting on a train.
Today, games give you 100 different paths to take.
And you can't take them all.
That's why they've become a personal experience.
You play Fall Out 3! I play Fall Out 3!
And the experience is not the same.
Your decisions are not the same as mine.
And more importantly, what you learn and what the game makes you feel
is not what I learn and feel.
But the game tells you that every decision you make...
has tangible consequences in the world in which the game unfolds, in the short and long term.
But it tells you:
"Hey! They're your decisions and respect them because they're yours.
Don't like it? Change pat hs! Like it? Keep going!"
But it's your life, it's your game and you have to love it because it's yours.
But the most important thing I've learned from video games is that..
life is a game that we can all play together.
Games teach you to work as a team.
The 20th century was driven by competition.
The 21st century is about collaboration.
We are 7 billion people on the planet today.
What would happen if we all decided to play the same game?
Nothing too complicated! The game of being a better neighbor.
Or, if we want to take a risk, the game of building a better future.
We all know here that games are much more fun when we play them together.
And the game of building a better future is a game worth playing together.
GAME OVER!
(applause)