I have 13 year old daughter,
but in 2012, when there was the financial crisis,
when all the stock markets of the world fell and all that,
she was five years younger than she is now, she would have been eight, nine years old.

And we were watching the news,
we were having lunch and watching the news
and a bald guy in a tie appeared,
a journalist who always gave bad news,
he was the one who predicted the tsunami and that a plane fell,
and that day he said: "Last moment,
the stock market has collapsed all over the world".

And my daughter looked at me like this and I turned pale.
And the guy went on, he says: "The nominal value of the bond has shot up
due to not being able to meet debt obligations".

And my daughter was watching me.
(Laughs)

"The investment banking collapsed," he said, "the shareholders are committing suicide".
And my daughter opened her big eyes and so did I.

Obviously, I got scared because something serious was happening.
And then Nina, my daughter, who always asked me what a tsunami is,
what is the plane that fell
and it was easy to explain the tsunami: it's the epicenter of a thing in the sea
that then kills the Filipinos, it's simple.
(Laughs)

She asked me: "What is this that happened now, dad, is it serious?"
And I realized that I had no idea
how to explain to a child what that was.

An earthquake is easy to explain, but how do you explain to a child
the collapse of the financial system?

You can't explain it because it's intangible, more than anything.

But as I am "hard-headed"
and in my spare time I am also a writer,
I set out to do it, so I wrote a children's story.

And the next day, when we were watching the news again
and she asked me again,
I told her a story that I want to share with you.

I told Nina that day that there was once
a very quiet village
and there was a boy named Pepe, the protagonist,
who lived in the farthest house in the village.

One afternoon, Pepe went for a walk and got thirsty.

When he returned to his house, he opened a bottle of wine
and, while drinking the wine, he discovered something
that no one had ever discovered: there were no bars in the village.

There wasn't a single bar.
Pepe thought that if he opened a bar,
he could make others happy by giving them drinks,
and he also thought that he could earn some money.

And he was happy with the idea of opening a bar.

That afternoon, his friend, Moncho, stopped by Pepe's house
and gave him a good name for the bar.

And it is well known that when a late-night idea has a name,
that idea starts to walk.

So Pepe made a list of needs
to open the first bar in town.

Nina was looking at me with open eyes, the story was going well so far.

Pepe realized that he had to buy tables, chairs, glasses, paint,
a corral for the bar customers to put their horses
and be able to come in for a drink.

And he did the math and all that was going to cost him about 10,000 coins.

Of course, Pepe didn't have 10,000 coins because he was poor,
but during the night he came up with a way to get those 10,000 coins.

Pepe cut out 1,000 slips of paper
and wrote on each slip the phrase:
"Coming soon, Pepe's Bar"; he wrote that 1,000 times.

And on Sunday, after mass,
he went to the town square dressed in his best suit
and told all the neighbors in the square:

"Dear neighbors, I'm going to open a bar on the outskirts of the village."
Everyone looked at him. "What a good idea!" some said.

Pepe felt very good with everyone's attention
and then he showed, in a fan, the 1,000 cut-out slips of paper and said:
--"this is important, Nina" I said to her--

Pepe said:
"Each of these 1,000 slips of paper costs 10 coins."
The neighbors looked at him.

"Whoever buys a slip of paper from me will have to keep it
because in a month, when I open my bar,
I'm going to pay 12 coins for each slip of paper you return to me."

Then there were whispers all over the square
and Moncho, who was the village fool, asked:

"Wait a minute, Pepe! But doesn't each slip of paper cost 10 coins?
Why are you going to give away two more coins later?"
And Pepe said: "It's not giving away, Mocho, it's compensating.

I'm going to compensate with two more coins
those who help me fulfill my dream, which is to open a bar."

Then the mayor, who was around, came over and said:
"It makes sense! It makes a lot of sense. Very good, Pepe!"
And Ernesto, who was rich and understood business, said:
"I think the idea is very good."

And Father Ricardo, taking out some coins from under his cassock, said:
"It's a very Christian idea! I want some of your slips of paper."
And everyone started buying Pepe's slips of paper.

In such a simple way, and in just one morning,
Pepe got the money to open his bar.

All the neighbors bought the 1,000 slips of paper from him.
"I bought two of them" said Sabino who was poor, but optimistic.
"I bought 36" shouted Quique who was greedy and arrogant.

Pepe went home with 10,000 coins in his backpack
and fell asleep thinking about his dream: opening a bar.

The next day was Monday and Pepe traveled to the city
and bought wood to build a counter and bought paint,
he came back home and started working.

He didn't go to the town square for the next four weeks.
That is to say, I told Nina,
Pepe didn't find out about the disaster that was going to happen
because of his slips of paper.

At that point in the story I stopped
and looked at my daughter to see if she was understanding the story.

You always have to "test" metaphors with children,
especially when they are complex ideas,
and she said to me: "Dad, this has nothing to do
with what the bald man on TV said, but it's good, keep going."
(Laughs)

Then I told her.
I told her what happened in the village during the first week.
That Monday, the square was full of people, much more than on a normal Monday.

Many neighbors had spent the whole night
cutting out their own slips of paper because they too had discovered,
they had projects that they couldn't carry out for lack of coins.

Some slips of paper said:
"Soon, Horacio's Ice Cream Parlor".

Other slips of paper said: "Coming soon, Carmen's Hair Salon".
There were even some slips of paper written by Moncho
with spelling mistakes, which said:
"At the end of the month, I'll make trips to the Moon".
(Laughs)

Suddenly, the neighbors climbed up the lampposts in the square
so that the other neighbors could buy those slips of paper.

They climbed up the fountain to exchange slips of paper for coins.
Tuesday was even worse
and by Wednesday you couldn't walk through the square because of the "mess" there was.

The mayor had to restore order
and set up a closed place in the town hall
so that the neighbors could meet
to exchange slips of paper without destroying the square.

This small place was inaugurated on Thursday
and was named "the room of the slips of paper".

And so it was that on Friday, all those who had a project
had already got the necessary coins to carry it out
and had started working. Horacio was already looking for milk,
cream, ice for his ice cream parlor,
Pepe was already sawing the wood for the counter of the bar.

Carmen was sharpening the scissors for her brand new hair salon
and Moncho had bought two skinny horses to make trips to the Moon.
(Laughs)

Only in the room of the slips of paper was a group of neighbors left
who had never in their lives come up with any interesting project.

All these neighbors had
were slips of paper from other people.

One of these neighbors, Ramon, complained out loud:
"Darn it!" he said.

"Now I need coins to buy cigarettes and I don't have any.
A few days ago, I exchanged my last 10 coins for a slip of paper
from Pepe and now I need to smoke".

"I have the same problem" said Luis,
"I want to go to the movies, I don't have a coin".

The complaints grew louder
until Sabino, who was cunning, raised his slip of paper and said:
"Look, guys,
in three weeks, Pepe is going to pay 12 coins
to whoever returns this slip of paper that I bought for 10.
I'm selling my slip of paper right now for eight coins!"
And the others looked at him, said "Oh!"

"Deal" said Ernesto who was rich, but wanted to be even richer
and took the slip of paper from his hands, for eight coins.

Ramon and Luis also sold their slips of paper for less than 10 coins
and, while one ran to buy cigarettes and the other went to the cinema,
the other neighbors saw that this was a new way of doing business,
even though they had never in their lives come up with a real idea.

Some climbed onto chairs, others onto tables.
They started to offer what they had and even Father Ricardo
came from the church sad and said:

"Friends, the day Moncho put his slips of paper up for sale,
I, being a Christian, bought a few from him because he's a fool.

Now Moncho sells them for 7 coins and says he will return 20 coins,
but he's a fool and wants to make trips to the Moon.

I now need coins to fix the bell tower
and no one wants to buy Moncho's slips of paper".

"I'm sorry, Father Ricardo" everyone said, "we can't buy.
How is that boy going to go to the Moon?" So the priest left the room
with Moncho's slips of paper, crestfallen,
and it was the first time in many years
that no one was helping him repair the church.

And so the first week went by.
Then I looked at Nina, who said to me:

"Now it seems
that it's starting to look like what the bald man on TV said".

And I said to her "Of course! In the real world
the room of the slips of paper is called 'the stock exchange',
while the slips of paper can have two names.

They can be called 'bonds', in some countries,
in other countries they are called 'obligations'.

The 12 coins that Pepe is going to pay when the bar is up and running,
or the 20 coins that Moncho says he's going to pay when he makes trips to the Moon,
are called 'nominal value of the bond'".

And Nina looked at me like this.
(Laughs)

She opened her big eyes because she understood the girl, eight years old.

Then I told her what happened the second week in the village.

I told her that Pepe's house no longer looked like a house,
Pepe's house looked like something else.

In the dining room, there was a wooden bar,
the bathroom had turned into two bathrooms, one for ladies, one for gentlemen.

The walls were half painted navy blue
and Pepe was very happy with the progress of his bar.

Since he still hadn't gone to the village, Pepe,
he still didn't know that the lives of his neighbors
were a mess of slips of paper going back and forth
changing price and owner.

Even the mayor, after talking it over with his secretary,
decided to join the new trend.

One Tuesday morning, the mayor came out onto the balcony with a megaphone and said:

"Neighbors, the square was damaged after the slip of paper frenzy.
I need to raise funds
to fix the damage to the lampposts,
to renew the fountain and to buy myself a motor car.

From this moment, I put on sale 1,000 official slips of paper".
"How many coins do they cost?" asked Sabino.
"No coins at all!" said the mayor,
"my slips of paper cost a horse.

When the fountain spouts water,
when the lampposts give light again and I have a motor car,
I will return two horses per slip of paper.

The official slips of paper are for sale from now,
run before they run out".
The mayor's slips of paper sold out in record time.

Everyone in the village gave their horses to the mayor
and, from that day on, tasks began to be done on foot.

Meanwhile, the exchange of slips of paper continued to increase
and there were not enough pencils to note
who owned what.

Some slips of paper were very desired, for example, Pepe's
who worked day and night on the realization of his bar,
but others slips of paper were not wanted by anyone,
for example, Moncho's
because his device to make trips to the Moon, for now,
only consisted of two horses and a cart.

No one believed that it would start to take off.
Ernesto, the rich neighbor
who had bought many slips of paper during the first week,
now wanted to get rid of Moncho's slips of paper.

And, as he also had slips of paper from Pepe, he invented something great
which he called: "Ernesto's bundles".

They were sealed packages with 100 slips of paper of all colors.
For example, there were 10 slips of paper from Pepe's bar on top,
20 slips of paper from Horacio's ice cream parlor in the middle
and 70 slips of paper
from Moncho's lunar project underneath, without anyone seeing them.

On Thursday of the second week, Ernesto's bundles were a great success
among the neighbors who were desperately looking for slips of paper from Pepe or the mayor,
but on Friday, Quique discovered the trick and said:

"Watch out, neighbors, watch out!
Ernesto's bundles sometimes come with slips of paper from Pepe or the mayor
on top and that's fine,
but at the bottom of the package there are many slips of paper from Moncho
who is never in his damn life going to make any trips to the Moon.
So before buying Ernesto's bundles look for my advice.
My fee for each piece of advice is two coins".
(Laughs)

From then on, the buyers of little papers always consulted Quique
before buying bundles from Ernesto.

Ernesto and Quique, who had been friends for many years,
stopped speaking to each other forever.

And so the second week passed.
By this point, Nina was almost an expert in all of this.
I explained to her that in the real world
the mayor's official papers are called "public debt securities".

I explained to her that Ernesto's bundles
are called "debt obligations",
while Quique's house, the place where the neighbors go
to find out if they trust Ernesto's bundles or not,
is called "investment bank'."

So I told Nina that, when the third week in the town began,
some projects were almost finished
and, on the other hand, others were still in their infancy.

Pepe only needed to nail the stake
so that the neighbors' horses would graze outside the bar.

Horacio had managed to whip milk and fruits for his ice cream shop
and all he had left was to bring ice bars from the city.

On the other hand, Carmen had not yet found a good location
to set up her hairdresser, although she already had dozens of sharp scissors.

And, what about Moncho? Poor Moncho.
His horses were getting thinner and sadder,
even though he brushed them day and night,
and it didn't seem that his device could fly in less than a week.

The neighbors who had Moncho's or Carmen's papers were restless
and could no longer sell them to anyone.

Until Quique appeared with a great idea.
"Listen!" Quique said.

Those who still have Moncho's papers, don't worry.
I can sell you "Quique's tranquility" for those papers.

"What is that?", asked Sabino
who had many of Moncho's papers.

"Very easy", said Quique.
"Those who have Moncho's papers pay me two coins each night
until the end of the month
and if Moncho doesn't manage to make trips to the Moon,
I pay the 20 coins promised by Moncho".

"Even if Moncho fails?" everyone asked.
"Even if he fails!", said Quique.
"What a great idea!", said Sabino,
"this way we will feel much more relaxed
and we will be able to buy more papers from the fool of the town".

"That's why my idea is called 'Quique's tranquility'", said Quique.
And many neighbors began to pay Quique
two coins per night
to insure Moncho's project.

In the midst of the euphoria for these new ideas,
no one in the town noticed
that the mayor had never fixed the lampposts
or the fountain in the square.

The mayor had only fulfilled a part of the promise:
he had escaped from the town with a motor car.
That was all he had done.

And the only horses left in the town were Moncho's.
All the others had been taken by the mayor.

The secretary, who had been the mayor's right hand
and knew about the scam from the beginning,
decided to do something so that no one would discover his boss's absence.

And his idea was great:
He brought a chalkboard to the paper hall and began to rate each project
from one to ten.

He gave Pepe's bar an eight,
Carmen's hair salon a five,
Horacio's ice cream shop a seven.
He gave Moncho's vehicle for moon trips a two
and, pretending to be distracted,
he gave the mayor's square reforms a 9.5

"What do these numbers mean?", Sabino asked.
And the secretary said:
"They are the chances of each project being completed.
It's to help, I do it for you."

And so the third week passed.
At this point, I explained to Nina that in the real world,
Quique's idea of offering tranquility about Moncho's papers
is called "debt default insurance"
and the big chalkboard where the secretary rates each project,
in the real world, is called "rating agencies",
which sometimes make mistakes unintentionally
and sometimes intentionally.

Then Nina asked me if finally Pepe
had managed to open his bar because we were already in the fourth week
and I told her the end of the story.
The end of the story goes like this:

When the fourth week arrived and the month was up,
Pepe got up very early and walked calmly to the town.

From a distance, he saw the facade of his bar
with the bright sign at full blast.
The bar was called "La Luna",
as Moncho had named it on the first day.

Now all that was left was for the neighbors to arrive on horseback,
with their throats dying of thirst.
Pepe walked the five leagues to the town
putting posters on all the trees along the way:
"Bar La Luna, open every night".

Every sign he put up, he went far away
and stood proudly looking at the sign.

However, when he arrived at the town square,
he didn't understand anything that was happening.
He thought he had taken the wrong road and was in a different town.

It seemed like a war had passed through that town.
The streetlights and the square fountain were destroyed,
there was not a single horse in the streets
and the neighbors were walking around talking to themselves.

"What happened here?" Pepe asked Horacio when he saw him.
"Oh! Pepe," said Horacio crying.
"Oh, Pepe. Everyone went crazy with the papers,
with mine, with Carmen's, with yours, with everyone's.

Suddenly, there were more papers than coins
and the mayor escaped from the town. Then there were no more coins.
Later the horses disappeared.
The sellers of Ernesto's bundles went bankrupt.
The resellers of Quique's tranquility couldn't pay anyone
and they escaped at night. We're ruined, Pepe".
"And your ice cream project?" Pepe asked.
"And Carmen's hair salon?"
"No, mine was a failure," said Horacio.

"There are no horses to go get ice from the city and the ice cream is melting.
And Carmen has no customers. Everyone's
pulling their hair out alone. Why do they need a hairdresser?"

Pepe was silent, he couldn't believe what they were telling him.
Then Horacio said: "Oh, my God! I need something strong".
And Luis said: "Me too, I have a dry throat".
And Sabino asked: "Pepe, did you open the bar you wanted to open or not?"
And others also approached to ask about the bar.

Pepe then discovered that, without a horse,
no one would ever be able to go to his bar on the outskirts of the town
and he also understood that he would never be able to return
the 10,000 coins to anyone.

And then he saw Moncho in the middle of the square.

Moncho's two skinny horses were the only animals left
and they pulled three carts, each with two wheels, in the form of a train.
Many neighbors would climb onto these carts
and others would form a long line, waiting to get on.
"Moncho!" Pepe asked, "where is all this people going?"
And Moncho said: "Where else?

To your bar! To The Moon."
Pepe saw a sign hanging on the broken fountain that said:

"Moncho makes trips to The Moon.
Departures: one coin. Return: free".
"But Moncho!" asked Pepe,
"did you know that everyone was going to be left without a horse?"
"No" said Moncho, "I only know one thing:

What I know is that people can go to a bar on horseback,
but no one can return drunk and riding a horse".
"And since I don't drink, I thought my business
could be to take them and bring them back from The Moon".

Then Pepe hugged Moncho, got on the first cart and shouted:
"Let's all go to The Moon! Free drinks the first night",
and all the people got on and applauded.

Nina, even, happily applauded the end of the story.
And then I told my daughter to be careful
because in the real world
the stories of Pepes who try to open bars,
or the stories of Monchos who want to make trips to the Moon
and nobody understands them,
are almost always projects
that don't usually have a happy ending like in children's stories.

Because in the middle appear Quicos,
mayors appear, Ernestos and secretaries appear
and they always ruin everything.
But when one of these projects does work,
I told my daughter to finish,
when these projects work, when something magical happens and they work,
they are called "dreams"
and they are usually wonderful.
(Applause)
Thank you very much.
(Applause)