Hello again friends of Easy Spanish.
I'm Alexa
and I'm at Carlos E. Restrepo park in the city of Medellin.
Today we are going to ask people what is your resolution or your resolutions for the year 2016

Well, I have many resolutions.
Among them is to be an Iron Man.
To have my first place in a half-distance triathlon
To finish my German courses
and to take a trip outside the country.
No matter the destination

To be better in the activities I train every day
and to continue working with my team of eight colleagues in the community communication processes of the city

Well, my number one New Year's resolution is to travel.
Where do you want to go?
I'm going to take a trip through South America
and on that trip I want to get to know myself and find myself.
So that's my first New Year's resolution.
And do you have more for the rest of the year?

I was thinking before the 31st to write all my resolutions.
But that is the main one, I want to know, meet new people.
Improve my English,
I really want to know what I want when I come back.
What job I like, what I want to do, where I want to live.
But basically that, traveling is number one.

That's good!
And you here?
Well my resolution for the next year is to continue with the university practices
to graduate
That is my greatest purpose to be able to do it in June
and already very basic things: read more, see more movies, go out to exercise.

Be better,
be better without fights
And eh live better.
And health too?
Health Yes.
Even if there is no money because health is not obtained and money is obtained

Hey, eh, the new years resolutions are:
work out a lot
lose some weight
work on a lot of personal
and laboral projects
that's basically it

ehh my new years resolutions,
the most important one is to finish my thesis
and graduate mid-year.
another resolution is to be able to start an investigation for the san rafaels munincipality in the seond semester of 2016

To work only on what I like,
to write,
to get the best editions of books
some of them, that i've already read but
i want to have good critical editions
work in literature
and culminate, conlcude two or three small unfinished  literature projects
so long ago
and i hope this year to dedicate
the right time to them,
time required for the correction

my proposition is to stop using the adverb "what"
multiple times in the same sentence or paragraph

My resolution is to learn to program very well.

My resolution is to stop using certain pet words
when I'm speaking, such as practically, done and more.

I say goodbye wishing you a 2016 full of happiness
success and a lot of joy
Thank you :)